qa-tests-backend/README.md, before:

# StackRox Platform Integration Tests

This framework is designed to test integration and functional flows through APIs on a running k8s or openshift cluster.

# Prerequisites
Gradle is used to build and run tests written in Groovy using the Spock test framework.

- If you would like to use the recommended IDE:
  - Download and install [IntelliJ IDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/)
    and create a new project from the `qa-tests-backend` directory.

# Running Tests
- If protos have been changed or not generated: `make proto-generated-srcs`
- If you plan to run tests pulling from quay.io (currently every test derived
  from `BaseSpecification`), set `REGISTRY_USERNAME` and `REGISTRY_PASSWORD` env
  vars. Read-only credentials are available in bitwarden's "ACS general engineering secrets"
  collection under `Quay.io readonly user`.

## Test access to the Stackrox instance under test
These tests work best against a StackRox deployed using `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/deploy.sh` scripts. If you deploy with
another method e.g. helm, or want to test against an existing cluster, or want to switch between clusters you will
need to consider the following environment variables:
- API_HOSTNAME: defaults to 'localhost' because `deploy.sh` creates a proxy to central at localhost:8000
- API_PORT: defaults to 8000
- CLUSTER: Either `OPENSHIFT` or `K8S`. This is inferred from the most recent `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/central-deploy`
  dir, so if you are deploying another way or have more than 1 cluster type deployed then you will
  need to set this appropriately.
- ROX_PASSWORD: This is inferred from the most recent `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/central-deploy/password` file.

When deploying using `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/deploy.sh` scripts you may need:
- MAIN_IMAGE_TAG: If your working directory has not been built and pushed and the output of `make tag` does not
  result in a resolvable tag for stackrox/main then you can set this to use an image suitable to run your tests.
- REGISTRY_USERNAME, REGISTRY_PASSWORD: Docker.io credentials. This is in conflict with the need to use quay.io
  credentials when running tests.

## Using IntelliJ
If you have deployed StackRox into a cluster with the `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/deploy.sh` script,
the tests in `src/test/groovy/` can be run directly. Cluster type and login data
are inferred from the `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/central-deploy` directory.

### Tests dependent on integration credentials
- If your tests depend on an integration password or token in an environment variable such as:
  `GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS_GCR_SCANNER`, `EMAIL_NOTIFIER_PASSWORD`,
  `MAILGUN_PASSWORD`, `JIRA_TOKEN`, `DTR_REGISTRY_PASSWORD`, `QUAY_PASSWORD`
  - Create a `qa-tests-backend/qa-test-settings.properties` file that contains environment variable assignments.
  - Copy environment variable settings from the [StackRox 1Password Vault](https://stackrox.1password.com)

### Custom configuration
- If you have deployed the cluster differently or need to use a custom environment variable configuration:
- Go to `Run > Edit Configurations`
- Select Gradle, add a new configuration
  - Script path : `github.com/stackrox/stackrox/qa-tests-backend/src/test/groovy/<Groovy class name>.groovy`
  - Working Directory : `github.com/stackrox/stackrox/qa-tests-backend`
  - Environment Variables:
    - `CLUSTER`: Either `OPENSHIFT` or `K8S`
    - `API_HOSTNAME`: hostname central is running; default `localhost`
    - `PORT`: central port; default `8000`
    - `ROX_USERNAME`: default `admin`
    - `ROX_PASSWORD`: default read from deploy dir based on specified `CLUSTER`
    - `KUBECONFIG`: kubeconfig file to use

  - module : `qa-test-backend.test`
- Save the configuration and run the test.

## Using command-line

If you have deployed StackRox into a cluster with the `deploy.sh` script,
the tests in `src/test/groovy/` can be run directly from the command-line without
setting any environment variables. Cluster type and login data
are inferred from the `central-deploy` directory.

To run tests, from within `qa-tests-backend` directory:

- A single test: `./gradlew test --tests=TestName`, where `TestName` is the name of the test, e.g, `TestSummary`
- A single test with filtering: `./gradlew test --tests=TestName.*filter*`, where `filter` is something to match in
  the test def string, e.g, `ComplianceTest.*CVE*` matches all feature tests that include `CVE`.
- A test group: `./gradlew test -Dgroups=GroupName`, where `GroupName` is the name of the test group, e.g, `BAT`
- A makefile target: `make -C qa-backend-tests smoke-test`

### Custom configuration
If you have deployed the cluster differently or need to use a custom configuration, set `CLUSTER`, `API_HOSTNAME`,
`PORT`,`ROX_USERNAME`, `ROX_PASSWORD` and other relevant integration credential environment variables.

# Adding Tests
## Annotations
New tests are added with a `@Tag` annotation to indicate which to which
group the test belongs. The default test group that runs in CI is the `BAT`
group.

# Running Bits of Groovy

Developing groovy code in a test specification context has a lot of
overhead and can often be painful. For more details see [sampleScripts](src/main/groovy/sampleScripts/README.md).

# Common Failure Patterns

## When the proxy to central dies
`Connection refused: localhost/0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1:8000`

You will need to start another proxy:

`nohup oc port-forward -n stackrox svc/central 8000:443 &`

 Or use the script provided by the deployment script:

`deploy/{k8s,openshift}/central-deploy/central/scripts/port-forward.sh 8000`

## When image pulls from docker.io get throttled

You shouldn't use images from DockerHub in tests.
We don't use a paid account there and so image pulls get throttled, and
tests that use such images fail.

If you need a specific image from DockerHub, pull it, retag as
`quay.io/rhacs-eng/qa:<your-tag-here>` and push. 
Then consume the new image from `quay.io/rhacs-eng/qa:<your-tag-here>`
in tests. Such pulls shouldn't get throttled.

Commit message:

chore(docs): how to run qa-test spin cycle

qa-tests-backend/README.md, after:

# StackRox Platform Integration Tests

This framework is designed to test integration and functional flows through APIs on a running k8s or openshift cluster.

# Prerequisites
Gradle is used to build and run tests written in Groovy using the Spock test framework.

- If you would like to use the recommended IDE:
  - Download and install [IntelliJ IDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/)
    and create a new project from the `qa-tests-backend` directory.

# Running Tests
- If protos have been changed or not generated: `make proto-generated-srcs`
- If you plan to run tests pulling from quay.io (currently every test derived
  from `BaseSpecification`), set `REGISTRY_USERNAME` and `REGISTRY_PASSWORD` env
  vars. Read-only credentials are available in bitwarden's "ACS general engineering secrets"
  collection under `Quay.io readonly user`.

## Test access to the Stackrox instance under test
These tests work best against a StackRox deployed using `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/deploy.sh` scripts. If you deploy with
another method e.g. helm, or want to test against an existing cluster, or want to switch between clusters you will
need to consider the following environment variables:
- API_HOSTNAME: defaults to 'localhost' because `deploy.sh` creates a proxy to central at localhost:8000
- API_PORT: defaults to 8000
- CLUSTER: Either `OPENSHIFT` or `K8S`. This is inferred from the most recent `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/central-deploy`
  dir, so if you are deploying another way or have more than 1 cluster type deployed then you will
  need to set this appropriately.
- ROX_PASSWORD: This is inferred from the most recent `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/central-deploy/password` file.

When deploying using `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/deploy.sh` scripts you may need:
- MAIN_IMAGE_TAG: If your working directory has not been built and pushed and the output of `make tag` does not
  result in a resolvable tag for stackrox/main then you can set this to use an image suitable to run your tests.
- REGISTRY_USERNAME, REGISTRY_PASSWORD: Docker.io credentials. This is in conflict with the need to use quay.io
  credentials when running tests.

## Using IntelliJ
If you have deployed StackRox into a cluster with the `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/deploy.sh` script,
the tests in `src/test/groovy/` can be run directly. Cluster type and login data
are inferred from the `deploy/{k8s,openshift}/central-deploy` directory.

### Tests dependent on integration credentials
- If your tests depend on an integration password or token in an environment variable such as:
  `GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS_GCR_SCANNER`, `EMAIL_NOTIFIER_PASSWORD`,
  `MAILGUN_PASSWORD`, `JIRA_TOKEN`, `DTR_REGISTRY_PASSWORD`, `QUAY_PASSWORD`
  - Create a `qa-tests-backend/qa-test-settings.properties` file that contains environment variable assignments.
  - Copy environment variable settings from the [StackRox 1Password Vault](https://stackrox.1password.com)

### Custom configuration
- If you have deployed the cluster differently or need to use a custom environment variable configuration:
- Go to `Run > Edit Configurations`
- Select Gradle, add a new configuration
  - Script path : `github.com/stackrox/stackrox/qa-tests-backend/src/test/groovy/<Groovy class name>.groovy`
  - Working Directory : `github.com/stackrox/stackrox/qa-tests-backend`
  - Environment Variables:
    - `CLUSTER`: Either `OPENSHIFT` or `K8S`
    - `API_HOSTNAME`: hostname central is running; default `localhost`
    - `PORT`: central port; default `8000`
    - `ROX_USERNAME`: default `admin`
    - `ROX_PASSWORD`: default read from deploy dir based on specified `CLUSTER`
    - `KUBECONFIG`: kubeconfig file to use

  - module : `qa-test-backend.test`
- Save the configuration and run the test.

## Using command-line

If you have deployed StackRox into a cluster with the `deploy.sh` script,
the tests in `src/test/groovy/` can be run directly from the command-line without
setting any environment variables. Cluster type and login data
are inferred from the `central-deploy` directory.

To run tests, from within `qa-tests-backend` directory:

- A single test: `./gradlew test --tests=TestName`, where `TestName` is the name of the test, e.g, `TestSummary`
- A single test with filtering: `./gradlew test --tests=TestName.*filter*`, where `filter` is something to match in
  the test def string, e.g, `ComplianceTest.*CVE*` matches all feature tests that include `CVE`.
- A test group: `./gradlew test -Dgroups=GroupName`, where `GroupName` is the name of the test group, e.g, `BAT`
- A makefile target: `make -C qa-backend-tests smoke-test`

### Custom configuration
If you have deployed the cluster differently or need to use a custom configuration, set `CLUSTER`, `API_HOSTNAME`,
`PORT`,`ROX_USERNAME`, `ROX_PASSWORD` and other relevant integration credential environment variables.

## Running a single test multiple times

To test for flakiness, you can run a single test multiple times while emulating a CI environment. This is
achieved by running the following commands:

```sh
./tests/e2e/run-e2e-tests.sh -t "$MAIN_IMAGE_TAG" -y --config-only qa
./tests/e2e/run-e2e-tests.sh -d -t "$MAIN_IMAGE_TAG" --spin-cycle=100 -y qa DiagnosticBundleTest
```

Note that access to the
[CI vault instance](https://vault.ci.openshift.org/ui/vault/secrets/kv/show/selfservice/stackrox-stackrox-e2e-tests/credentials)
is required to set up credentials as they are used in CI.

# Adding Tests
## Annotations
New tests are added with a `@Tag` annotation to indicate which to which
group the test belongs. The default test group that runs in CI is the `BAT`
group.

# Running Bits of Groovy

Developing groovy code in a test specification context has a lot of
overhead and can often be painful. For more details see [sampleScripts](src/main/groovy/sampleScripts/README.md).

# Common Failure Patterns

## When the proxy to central dies
`Connection refused: localhost/0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1:8000`

You will need to start another proxy:

`nohup oc port-forward -n stackrox svc/central 8000:443 &`

 Or use the script provided by the deployment script:

`deploy/{k8s,openshift}/central-deploy/central/scripts/port-forward.sh 8000`

## When image pulls from docker.io get throttled

You shouldn't use images from DockerHub in tests.
We don't use a paid account there and so image pulls get throttled, and
tests that use such images fail.

If you need a specific image from DockerHub, pull it, retag as
`quay.io/rhacs-eng/qa:<your-tag-here>` and push.
Then consume the new image from `quay.io/rhacs-eng/qa:<your-tag-here>`
in tests. Such pulls shouldn't get throttled.
